[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH:
When we see someone
stressed out or traumatized,
the first thing we instinctively
say is take a deep breath.
But what's actually going on
during these conscious breaths?
Anders Olsson, along
with the depths and many
of the ancient
mysteries and religions,
has made a deep study
of our breathing
and believes that our breath
is the basis for the quality
of our life-- from good
health, to good sex,
and even enlightenment.
Welcome.
This is-- I was
saying off-camera
to someone a little
earlier today
that, if you had
courses that one
must have to study
in a lifetime,
this should be whatever
grade 101, breathing.
I'm just going to,
right off the top,
how different would our
world be if we all actually
used our breath?
>>ANDERS OLSSON: That's
a very good question.
I think a person with
good breathing habits,
that's not a person that
ends up in a lot of conflicts
or even start wars.
Because we are able to go
down by breathing in and good
fashion, getting
to our inner core.
And I guess there
is where love is.
So I think we would
have a far better world.
And, actually, in the
word, respiration,
it means reconnection to spirit.
So just there in the word
you have-- it says something.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And you have a very lovely
energy, very clear skin,
clear eyes, peaceful,
calm, and relaxed.
And that's not what
you always were.
>>OLSSON: No, that's true.
>>REGINA: We're going
to get into this.
And when you're a kid-- it
was fun reading about this--
you were an uptight little guy.
Time, time, time, everything
had to run on time.
And you were fascinated
with time, in particular.
So tell us a little bit
about how you started in life
and how this journey came to be.
>>OLSSON: Yeah.
I've had a racing mind
since I was a kid.
I tend to think that I
was born in turbo mode.
And let's just say,
about the timing,
I think that just speeded
up my mind even more.
Timing on my way to
school, or a timing
even when eating breakfast,
or timing when doing
sit ups or push ups.
There was always things to
compete for and to improve.
And also, along with
this racing mind, using
goes along fear, anxiety, worry.
So I could see,
when I look back,
that when I was stressed
out those came along,
as well-- more
fear, more worries.
And of course you
want to improve things
that you are not happy with.
And I've tried many
things in my life
to feel better, get better.
And I've improved
the way I exercise.
I exercise in a more
low-intense level.
I've improved my breathing
habits and many other things.
But, by far, the most important
thing I've come across
is to improve my
breathing habits.
>>REGINA: It makes total sense.
It drives everything.
>>OLSSON: It
actually does, yeah.
And if we think about it,
if we want to induce stress
to our body, one of
the most efficient ways
is to alter our
breathing pattern.
There are three major things.
Like, breathing
fast and shallow.
[RAPID BREATHING]
If you do that for a while,
you will probably not
be more relaxed,
you will probably
be quite more stressed.
>>REGINA: Until you pass out.
>>OLSSON: Yeah.
Or if you hold your
breath, like many of us do.
[GASP]
Oh, a text message.
Or,
[GASP]
Oh, who was that
entering the door?
>>REGINA: If you
startle a lot, yes.
>>OLSSON: It's is similar to
[GASP]
Oh, there is a tiger.
And we have this
old reaction where
we enter into fight-flight.
So, many of us, for example
when we concentrate,
we tend to hold our breath.
So then we induce stress.
Again, if you try holding your
breath for a minute, for sure
you will be more stressed out.
>>REGINA: And vice versa.
We're going to talk about
some of your experiments
along the way you've
done with breathing.
Because you want to get
to the bottom of it.
You're a genuine
boots-on-the-ground researcher.
>>OLSSON: Yeah, that's true.
Very true.
>>REGINA: You've tested your
body in some interesting ways.
Let's start somewhere, here.
First of all, I mean, there
are so many books out there--
there are a number of books
out there on breathing.
Why another one?
What is it you're
bringing to the table?
>>OLSSON: Yes.
When I is started, the
literature available--
either way, I found it, they
were maybe a bit to technical,
more addressing the medical
community, or maybe a bit
too spiritual.
I trained in yoga,
myself, and I think
it's great with yoga,
for example, or qigong,
or meditation, where you have
a lot of focus on breathing.
But many people, they
find it kind of awkward,
or they are not
interested, maybe,
in sitting in a certain position
or making certain sounds.
So I wanted to write something,
just to strip out everything
except the breathing.
What actually is good
breathing habits?
What is poor breathing habits?
And what are the reasons
for poor breathing habits?
And how do I take-- how do I
get from poor to good breathing
habits?
>>REGINA: OK.
So that takes us to the
subject of Professor and MD,
Konstantin-- how do
I say his last name?
Boo-take-yo?
>>OLSSON: Buteyko.
>>REGINA: Buteyko.
>>OLSSON: Buteyko, yeah.
>>REGINA: And now, tell us what
his contributions in this field
have been.
>>OLSSON: Yeah.
I have been inspired
a lot by Buteyko.
And he was a Russian
medical doctor
and professor who
made just the simplest
discovery in the 1950s.
And after his discovery, he
spent the rest of his life--
50 years-- in helping people
improve their breathing habits.
And at the time when
he made the discovery,
he had really high blood
pressure-- like 220 times 120.
>>REGINA: Wow.
>>OLSSON: And at the
time, he was only 29.
>>REGINA MEREDITH: Wow, bad.
>>OLSSON: And he knew,
with that being a doctor,
that this is not good for me.
I will probably just
have a couple of years
left if I don't change that.
And when he came
across a patient
with high blood pressure
and poor breathing habits,
Buteyko realized when he
left that, oh, wait a second.
This guy, he had really
high blood pressure.
I have high blood pressure.
And he had poor
breathing habits.
How are my breathing habits?
And the thing is,
Buteyko before,
when training to
become a doctor,
he had studied many
people on their deathbeds.
He had spent hundreds
of hours and actually
monitoring their breathing.
And he saw the worse
they were feeling--
the closer they were to their
own death, the more impaired
their breathing were.
So when he saw this guy, who
reminded him of the people
on their deathbed, he then
realized that his breathing
habits wasn't good either.
So when he started
to improve them,
he started to get
rid of his symptoms.
Because he had kidney
pains and headache,
and, just within
five minutes is what
they say, that he started
to notice the effect,
when he started to breathe
more deeply and slowly.
So after his discovery, he went
back to breathing normally,
and then his symptoms came back.
So, being in a hospital
setting, of course,
he ran around the
hospital the whole night,
waking up patients and
forcing them, more or less.
>>REGINA: Making his clinical
study, right there on the spot.
>>OLSSON: Yeah, right there.
And they all confirmed
his findings,
that when they started to
improve their breathing,
they slowly started to
improve their health
and got rid of their
symptoms, or reduced them.
>>REGINA: So is there,
generally speaking,
a direct link between blood
pressure and our breathing.
I mean, I know there
are lots of factors,
but do they-- if you were
to distill it-- looking
at the other chemicals in
the blood and the arteries
and so forth, can it be
distilled back to breathing?
>>OLSSON: As you say,
there are many factors.
But if we just think about
where is our heart located.
Just between the lungs, right?
So there is really
a close connection
between the lungs and the heart.
That's why it's called
cardiopulmonary divisions
on the hospital.
So if we have impaired
breathing, if we breathe fast,
unrhythmic, tense--
then we most likely
will have a fast,
unrhythmic, tense heart.
So it affects our heart a lot.
And the other thing
about breathing
is that we upset the
oxygen-carbon dioxide balance
when we have poor
breathing habits.
We usually breathe
too much, which
means we inhale too much oxygen,
which we don't have a need for,
and we exhale too
much carbon dioxide.
And carbon dioxide is produced
all the time in our body
during metabolism and
when we produce energy.
And when we have lower levels
of carbon dioxide, which
many of us have when we have
impaired breathing habits,
then the positive effects
of carbon dioxide gets lost.
Because we may have
heard that the oxygen,
yeah, that's the good thing.
Carbon dioxide, that that's
the bad guy, the waste gas.
Just get rid of it, out
of it as soon as possible.
But the thing is it's about
balance, as everything.
So what happens is that
carbon dioxide has a widening
effect of the blood vessels.
And since we have,
actually, blood vessels that
can take you two and a half
times around the earth--
60,000 miles.
>>REGINA: I know.
It's amazing.
It's shocking when
you think about it.
>>OLSSON: Yeah.
Our body is totally amazing.
>>REGINA: It is.
>>OLSSON: So think about it.
If you have, then, lower levels
of carbon dioxide, these blood
vessels will be tighter.
So the heart has to work harder
to pump the blood around.
So that makes sense, then, that
we have higher blood pressure
if we have poor
breathing habits.
>>REGINA: If we're not
breathing properly,
it totally messes with
our body's ability
to uptake the oxygen, right?
>>OLSSON: Yeah, because
that's another effect
of carbon dioxide.
It's not only that we
need to take in oxygen,
and we have the blood full
of oxygen. That's not usually
the problem.
Especially when we
over-breathe, we
have more oxygen in
the blood than we need.
The problem is,
of course, we want
the oxygen to leave
the blood and enter
into our liver, or
muscles, or brain.
And for that to happen,
we need carbon dioxide.
Carbon dioxide kicks out
the oxygen of the blood.
So it makes a lot of sense.
Because it's not a coincidence
where the oxygen is delivered.
So if I work this muscle,
it needs more oxygen
here than this muscle,
which is at rest.
And when I work this muscle,
the metabolism increases,
and when it does--
the metabolism is
when oxygen and nutrients
is converted to energy,
and, in that process,
when energy is created,
also heat and carbon
dioxide is created.
So when this muscle works,
the metabolism increases.
So heat and carbon
dioxide leaves the muscle
and reaches the
bloodstream, and that's
the signal for the oxygen to
go the opposite direction.
That's the signal
that lowers the pH,
so the hemoglobin, holding
tight to the oxygen,
will change shape, basically,
and release the oxygen
so that this muscle
can continue to work.
So if I'm going
around over-breathing,
if I do like this, for example,
hyperventilating for awhile,
[RAPID BREATHING] and then
trying to work this muscle,
I will have less endurance.
Because then I have lowered
my levels of carbon dioxide,
so not enough oxygen will
be kicked out of the blood.
I will just have the blood
filled with the oxygen,
but it will just pass by,
and I will exhale it again.
>>REGINA: OK, so--
>>OLSSON: Does that make sense?
>>REGINA: But what
does that mean
for people who do, like,
extreme sports or long distance
running, and so forth?
What's going on
there, because you're
[RAPID BREATHING] Of course,
your body's demanding it, too.
But what happens there?
Is that a good thing?
>>OLSSON: No.
Usually, if you ask 100 athletes
how they breathe when they run
or when they
exercise, they usually
don't have that much of an idea.
They just train their
muscles, their tolerance
for lactic acid, and the breath
is usually very overlooked.
>>REGINA: But what does this
do to their long-term health
profile?
Is this a good thing to do,
in general, for us, or not?
>>OLSSON: I think
mouth breathing, which
most athletes do, is
detrimental to our health.
So we should try to
keep that at a minimum.
And many people that exercise--
not the long-distance runners--
they tend to exercise in
a low-intense fashion,
and then they believe more in
a low-intense, slow fashion.
They could easily--
probably-- close their mouth
and breathe through their nose.
>>REGINA: Is this a guideline?
If you're doing something
to the point where
you have to breathe
through your mouth,
it's probably detrimental?
>>OLSSON: For me,
it's a guideline, yes.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Or can you do it in short
bursts, and it's OK?
Or just not a good idea?
>>OLSSON: I've actually
been trying on myself.
I've been able to do
high-intense exercise, as well,
in intervals, with
only nasal breathing.
So most people
that exercise, they
do it in kind of a
high-intense fashion.
And I see that that
creates breathing habits,
that they are in
the training arena,
they [RAPID BREATHING] breathe
like that, because they
exercise very hard.
And then they get off
the training arena,
and they continue to
breathe like that.
So it's like, if we do
something often enough,
we tend to create new habits.
>>REGINA: Oh, yeah.
>>OLSSON: So actually a lot
of athletes that I meet,
they have poor breathing habits.
And it's like they are creating
that with their high intensity
exercise.
>>REGINA: Yeah, because
a lot of times--
I used to do mid-distance
kind of running a lot.
>>OLSSON: OK.
>>REGINA: Well, short,
mid, whatever-- six,
seven miles a day,
kind of thing.
And there was a point
where you settle into it,
and everything
just feels groovy,
because I wasn't pushing it.
But I noticed a lot, on
long distance runners,
there's a kind of
pallor about them.
It's not a healthy looking--
it's not shiny, like you are,
for example.
There's something that
seems to be almost eating
the life force in the body.
And I would think it would have
something to do with breathing.
>>OLSSON: Yeah.
And the interesting thing
is-- I mention two things that
are easy to do to induce stress
to our body, we breathe fast
or we hold our breath.
The third thing is to actually
make our airways narrow.
>>REGINA: And how do we
narrow the passageways?
>>OLSSON: By mouth breathing.
Because we take in air
that is cold, usually.
It's dry, and it's
full of particles.
In a single day, 100 billion
particles we take in.
And when we take
them in unfiltered,
it creates irritated airways.
They get inflamed, and
so they get more narrow.
So here we induce stress.
We really put our
body on red alert.
And stress hormone starts
to be higher in our body,
and we end up more
in fight-flight.
So that's what we do when we
breathe through our mouth.
>>REGINA: Well, I would
think, in addition,
you don't have the filtration
process for whatever
else is in the air, as well.
>>OLSSON: No, that's true.
So the nose in
itself-- because here
the air is prepared
for the lungs.
The air is warmed,
it's humidified,
and it's cleansed of bacteria.
And it also has the ability
to drill the air further down
into our lungs.
So mouth breathing leads
to a shallow breathing.
>>REGINA: Kind of
chest breathing.
>>OLSSON: Yeah, chest breathing.
So if you exercise
a lot, you probably
will end up with the poor
breathing habits outside
of the training arena, as well.
>>REGINA: OK.
So you've tested it yourself.
And I remember
reading that you had
done some long-distance--
mid- to long-distance running,
a half marathon-- with
your mouth taped shut.
>>OLSSON: Yeah.
I did that.
Once, I did a race just to
sort of get some attention.
And I had actually-- it
was duct tape, completely
one way around like this.
>>REGINA: One piece.
>>OLSSON: So the
first few seconds, I
feel a bit stressed, but
then I was able to calm down.
But it was worth it.
I got the attention I wanted.
And I really wanted-- I
noticed the runners passing me
during the race, they
thought I was a bit crazy.
But I really wanted
them to start
thinking about their
own breathing habits
when they do their exercising.
And, actually, since
then, quite a few
have been started to
doing that and started
to apply nasal
breathing, as well.
>>REGINA: And it
didn't stress you out
to be running with your mouth
taped shut for that distance.
>>OLSSON: No,
because I had already
done it for a couple of years.
>>REGINA: I see, yeah.
>>OLSSON: Although, I don't
I don't do it with the taped
mouth when I exercise.
I just did it during the race.
But, so, no.
I wasn't stressed out at all.
And another thing,
an important thing--
it's also connected
to high blood
pressure-- because when you
exhale through your mouth,
there is a study saying
that we breathe out 42% more
water compared to our nose.
>>REGINA: Oh, so we're
dehydrating ourselves
by breathing through our mouths.
>>OLSSON: Yes.
>>REGINA: Interesting
>>OLSSON: Thinking about the
blood, it's like, I think,
93% water.
So when we are decreasing the
amount of water in our body,
the blood will be more thicker.
So, again, that could lead
to higher blood pressure.
>>REGINA: Oh, now that's a
really interesting point.
The other thing you
did-- and, again, this
will tie back to
breathing too shallowly
or breathing too much.
And, as you already stated, if
you're breathing too rapidly
and up high, like
this, you're-- A,
you're dehydrating your
body, it sounds like.
>>OLSSON: Yeah, yeah.
>>REGINA: You're also narrowing
your natural passageways,
because you're not using
them properly, right?
>>OLSSON: Yeah, true.
>>REGINA: What else is
happening when you're breathing
like [RAPID BREATHING]?
>>OLSSON: It's
extremely inefficient.
Think about, we're doing this
a thousand times per hour.
That's like 25,000
times in a day.
So of course we want
it to be efficient.
And a really good
efficient breathing pattern
only takes a couple of percent
of our total bodily resources.
But if we have impaired
breathing habits,
it could take 5%,
10%, 15%, 20%, 25%.
And since our breath
is always number one--
if we stop breathing,
we will die--
it's on the top of the list.
It has the highest priority.
So if my breathing habits take--
I mean, the resources to move
the air in and out-- if it
takes 10% of my body resources,
it means that I have less
energy to think a thought,
fight a bacteria, digest
food, and so forth.
So it's really inefficient.
Because we have what is
called, in medical terms,
a dead space here.
It's like a snorkel,
if you like.
When we take the air in, it's
first divided-- two branches
to each lung.
And then there are
23 more branches.
So the air should
travel 24 stories down
before there is any real action.
These alveoli, the
lung sacks, that's
where the action is, where
the oxygen is transferred
to the blood and
the carbon dioxide
is transferred from the blood
so that we can exhale it.
So when we have
more narrow airways,
when we move the
air just up here,
we are basically just
moving the air in and out
on this snorkel--
this dead space.
>>REGINA: It's not really
efficiently being delivered.
>>OLSSON: It's totally
inefficient, yes.
So that's why we have to
compensate and have to take
more breaths per minute.
A good, really good
breathing pattern
is just 10-12
breaths per minute.
And when I count the number
of breaths from people,
without them knowing it, I
rarely see someone below 18.
So they're between 18 and
25 breaths per minute.
That's what I find.
And so that's a
severe over-breathing.
Most of us, we are breathing
for two, or three, or even
four people.
>>REGINA: Wow, interesting.
Now does that very
culture to culture,
where you're living
in Western society
where civilization's
operating at a very rapid pace
and we're drinking
coffee and trying
to make the next meeting.
Is it worst there,
say, than places
that maybe have less
of that influence?
A little more
indigenous, laid back?
>>OLSSON: I think so, yeah.
Although I haven't really
the scientific studies.
But my experience is
that that is the case.
And that, for example
if you go out in nature,
you will automatically
breathe slower and probably
through the nose, as well.
For example, here,
it's spring now.
And [INHALE] you can
smell the spring, almost.
Compared to in the
city, where there
may be a lot of chemicals,
and you may even--
>>REGINA: Fumes.
>>OLSSON: Yeah, fumes.
You open your mouth because
you don't want to smell it.
And you may even think, I
don't want that deep down
into my lungs.
So it creates a shallow
breathing in itself, the air.
So, yes, I would say
that it's most likely
these stressful
environments that create
these poor breathing habits.
>>REGINA: Yes.
OK, what about
the opposite end--
people who seem to be
breathing kind of-- they
may be breathing down into
their belly, but kind of shallow
maybe, or maybe they stop.
Maybe just stop breathing
in certain instances
of either effort or
contemplation or whatnot.
What is the danger in
not breathing enough?
>>OLSSON: Yeah.
I think the thing is
that we notice, no, I'm
not breathing at all.
I'm holding my breath.
I'm a breath-holder.
Or, I'm reading very
fast or very shallow.
Or, I'm, as you described,
maybe I'm breathing too little.
But that may be what
we pay attention to,
but that may not
be the whole truth.
We may breathe more when we
are not paying attention to it.
Because it's really
hard to-- for example,
each time I come across someone
taking 25 breaths per minute,
I get so surprised.
I would never ever
have spotted that.
And I've been doing
this now since the 2009,
so I'm kind of a
nerd in this way.
So it's really easy
to hide this kind
of low-grade hyperventilation.
>>REGINA: OK, so speaking
of hyperventilation,
that's another
experiment you did.
I think most of us
have experienced,
at one time or another--
usually through something
traumatic or shocking.
But you hyperventilated for
20 minutes at one stretch.
What happens when
we hyperventilate?
>>OLSSON: Yeah, I
tried it a few times,
just out of curiosity
what happens.
And for one thing, after
hyperventilating for so long,
I could hold my breath for ages.
I don't need to
breathe, and that's
because of the oxygen-carbon
dioxide balance.
And another thing is it
took five minutes, at least,
before my hands started shaking.
I was totally not
ready to do anything.
My brain, my cognitive
ability was not at its peak.
And, actually, when I did it
once, I did it in the morning.
During the whole day,
I felt like I was not
of use to do anything.
I wouldn't say depressed--
it's a strong word.
But likely depressed
and low energy.
And I knew intellectually
that-- because I read a study
where they had people
hyperventilating-- they
would study them for one hour.
And once they lowered the
levels of carbon dioxide,
that was the aim of the study.
They should reduce them
by 50%, and once they
had achieved that, which was
in, like, 10 minutes or so,
they were able to keep at that
level without any real efforts.
They just [DEEP BREATH]
took a sigh here and there,
or just a big breath.
So no one could see that
they were hyperventilating.
So it is really interesting.
If you think, if you go through
a stressful period-- just
a few minutes, or it could be
a few weeks, or a few months,
you are then increasing
you breathing,
you're hyperventilating,
so you are lowering
the CO2, the carbon
dioxide, and you
are able to keep there at that
level without any real effort.
So I realized that that was what
I did with my hyperventilation.
I really went down
energy-wise and health-wise.
>>REGINA: I wrote down
all these different things
that happen when we tend to
over-breathe or hyperventilate.
You don't have oxygen released
into the tissues of the body,
right?
>>OLSSON: Yeah, true.
>>REGINA: That has to
be terrible for things
like diabetes and all of that.
And you start having
an energy deficiency.
It's not oxygenating the body,
but it's depleting the body,
right?
>>OLSSON: Exactly.
I mean, that's the
reason why we can only
survive for a couple of
minutes without breathing--
our huge dependence on oxygen.
And when we convert nutrients
to energy, we can
do it in two ways--
either without oxygen
or with oxygen.
When we do it without oxygen,
we get very little energy.
And since the
amount of energy we
need every day, it's almost
as much as our body weight--
and that's not stored, it's
created when we need it.
And if we do it, then,
without oxygen, we
get very little energy compared
to when we do it with oxygen.
We can get up to 19 times
more energy-- one, nine-- out
of the same amount of nutrient.
>>REGINA: Wow, that's amazing.
>>OLSSON: So that's the key.
That's why we are so
dependent upon breathing.
So, of course, if we think
that, oh, I have low energy.
I need a coffee.
I need sugar.
Next time, maybe we
can go to our breathing
and start to apply slow
breathing, low and slow,
in and out through our nose, and
see if we can gain more energy.
>>REGINA: It makes total sense.
It also compromises
the nervous system
and creates nervous
disorders, right?
>>OLSSON: That's true.
Yeah.
Actually, the nose-- we have
this lateral connection.
So there are some
yoga practices,
for example-- alternative
nasal breathing where you.
>>REGINA: I was going
to bring that up.
Uh-huh.
And all the ancient traditions
give these protocols
in their teachings.
And it's big.
I mean, some of them
use breathing alone
as the primary
source of healing.
>>OLSSON: Yeah.
I think it's too
simple for our society.
We want to complicate things.
It doesn't really fit in.
I mean, in Sweden, I think we
have 400 different specialties
of doctors, and breathing
goes across all of them.
So no one is really paying
any attention to the breathing
because it doesn't fit in.
So you said, um--
>>REGINA: Oh,
nervous disorders--
it puts a strain on
the teeth, the heart,
and then talk about that.
Because then we're
going to get to how
our face is affected,
and our teeth,
and our development of our jaw.
This, to me, is fascinating.
But let's just finish up on
nervous system and the heart--
what it does to
the heart muscle.
>>OLSSON: So the
nervous system--
the automatic
nervous system, which
takes charge of automatic
functions, like heartbeat,
digestion, and so forth--
it's divided into two parts--
the sympathetic, the gas
pedal, the fight or flight,
and then we have the
parasympathetic, the rest
and digest, recovery.
And when we inhale
through our left nostril--
I talk about this
lateral connection.
So the left is connected
to this part of the body.
So, for example, if we were
to inhale coal dust, that
will end up-- if we inhale
it through the left nostril,
it will end up in
the right lung.
So, for example, if we
have problems sleeping,
we are probably more
in sympathetic mode.
So we want to shift
to parasympathetic.
>>REGINA: Is sympathetic mode
to activate the nervous system,
breathing through
the right nostril?
>>OLSSON: Well, then
if you-- usually then
we are in our left brain, the
logical, the problem brain.
So we want to shift
to the right brain,
so then we have to breathe
through our left nostril.
We can also do the
alternating nasal breathing
to balance the nervous system.
But if we just want
to get to sleep,
I suggest you try the breathing
in through your left nostril
for a few minutes.
>>REGINA: And I know in ancient
studies, that is what it says.
To breathe in through the left,
soothes the nervous system
and calms.
>>OLSSON: Yeah, right.
>>REGINA: To breathe
in through the right,
give energy and excites.
>>OLSSON: Yes.
>>REGINA: And I've
played with this
quite a bit through the
years, and, honestly,
I haven't found anything
better than breathing--
alternate breathing, or
choosing whichever function
I'm trying to enhance, through
that particular nostril.
It works like a gem.
I mean, look at
all the drugs we're
taking to compensate for that.
>>OLSSON: Yeah, yeah.
And another thing with the
breath is that, when we inhale,
we also go more to
the sympathetic part
of the nervous system.
The pulse goes up, and
it's an active action
where the diaphragm muscle moves
down, and in the muscles, as
well, in the chest moves.
So it's an active
thing we are doing.
So it's like [GASP]
this reaction that's
really waking up our body.
>>REGINA: Sympathetic,
waking up.
>>OLSSON: Yeah,
waking our body up.
But the exhale, then, is
connected to parasympathetic.
>>REGINA: Which makes sense--
calming, and soothing,
and quieting.
>>OLSSON: Yeah, like,
oh, now, we can relax.
>>REGINA: [SIGH]
>>OLSSON: What do
we do? [SIGH] Right?
We sigh in relief.
So many of us, we have
these impaired exhalations.
I think that is
where the key is.
If you're about to get
into any kinds of problem,
you may find yourself [GASP]
breathing in more, holding
your breath, and breathing
fast, but forgetting to exhale
or exhaling too fast.
So by just extending
your exhalation,
you can actually calm
down, just as these
exercises you mentioned,
alternate nasal breathing.
So I guess most of us, we are
too much in the sympathetic,
and we want to end up more
in the parasympathetic.
>>REGINA: We need
to exhale more.
>>OLSSON: We need
to exhale more, yes.
Longer.
>>REGINA: Waiting to exhale.
OK, let's talk about, and
we'll have a couple images
over this, as well, what happens
to our face and our teeth
in our development as,
say, even as young people,
if we start breathing through
the mouth for some reason?
This is really interesting, too.
>>OLSSON: It is, yeah.
And if you ask a dentist about
it, they usually know about it.
But there seems to be
a lack of communication
about this information
to parents and children.
So the reason why
retainers work is
because they can exert a
tiny amount of pressure
over a long time.
That's why they can be
able to move a tooth.
But these muscles we
have in our mouth--
our lips, our cheeks,
our tongue-- they are
far more stronger than that.
So when they are not in
the right place, when
we are using them in the
wrong way, when we swallow,
for example-- which we do
a couple of thousand times
per day-- that
affects our teeth.
So the main thing
is to get our tongue
to rest in the
roof of our mouth.
And if you just close
your mouth and swallow,
you can notice that the
tongue pressure up, upwards,
and it pressures
to this bone, here.
It's called the maxilla, and it
gives shape to the whole face.
It extends all the
way up to the eyes.
So 2/3 of the eyes rests in
this maxilla, this huge muscle.
And it's stimulated, it's growth
is stimulated, with every time
we swallow and when the tongue
rests in the room of the mouth.
When we are mouth breathers,
the tongue is not up there.
Because [RAPID BREATHING]
>>REGINA: It's slack.
>>OLSSON: We cannot
have it there, right?
Because then it
would be in the way.
So we will have it either in
the middle of our mouth or down.
>>REGINA: So it
kind of collapses--
>>OLSSON: It collapses
the development, yeah.
>>REGINA: --the
structure of our face.
>>OLSSON: So instead of
the maxilla growing widely
and forward, it will then grow
and be smaller and may create--
>>REGINA: More flat?
>>OLSSON: Yeah, flat, exactly.
So create a more
flat, narrow face.
And you were talking
about the chin, earlier.
This chin needs a reference-- a
point of reference to develop.
And that's the upper jaw.
So when we have our
mouth open too much,
it will not have a
point of reference,
and we may get a receding chin.
It doesn't know where to grow.
>>REGINA: We have this
picture of this one young boy,
who I believe is,
what, 10 years old--
>>OLSSON: Yeah.
>>REGINA: --when the
picture, the first one,
started on the left, there.
Right?
And then, as the years went
on, he was a mouth breather?
>>OLSSON: He got a
gerbil when he was 14,
so he developed allergy.
Got a blocked nose,
opened his mouth,
and started to breathe
through his mouth
since four years of age.
>>REGINA: And so his
jaw started responding
by developing differently.
>>OLSSON: Yeah, you can
see he has a receding chin.
You can see the
nose looks bigger.
It's because his face has not
grown forward and in width.
You can see around
his face, that he
has the habit of
having his mouth open.
If we were to see
his teeth, we would
see that they would be crooked.
And actually, this
maxilla, this large bone
that gives shape
to the whole face,
it-- the nasal airways
are-- 85% of them
are built up on the maxilla.
So if the maxilla is not
developed fully, of course,
it will be harder for us to
breathe through our nose.
So it's not only the aesthetic,
it's also the airways.
So this boy will
most likely have
sleep problems, become a
snorer, and may, at some point,
even develop sleep apnea.
Because his airways will
be narrow here and also
here where the air should pass.
When we lie down, it's
harder for the air to pass.
So if we already,
in the beginning,
have narrow airways, because
our maxilla and our lower jaw
has not developed as it should.
>>REGINA: I know it's kind
of a chicken-or-egg thing.
But we say, yeah, but these
things are congenital,
because the mother had a
chain that was receded.
Is it possible that the
mother had obstructed
kind of passageways herself
and maybe inclinations
toward the same
kind of breathing?
>>OLSSON: I don't
think-- I think
that's an argument put
forward since there
is no other explanation.
>>REGINA: Sure.
>>OLSSON: I don't
agree with that.
And one study done in
the early 19th century--
sorry, 20th century-- but
a dentist, Weston Price.
He visited many native
cultures, and he
could see that the father or
mother or the grandparents,
they had a perfect set of teeth.
>>REGINA: Yes, beautiful teeth.
We can see it, yes.
>>OLSSON: But once
they started to develop
the more westernized
eating habits, for example,
and stress, which then leads
to impaired breathing habits,
then the children
got poor teeth.
>>REGINA: Yes.
He has that well documented.
>>OLSSON: Yes, very well.
And a lot of images--
>>REGINA: Yes, and their
jaws developed differently.
>>OLSSON: Yes.
So I don't agree
with that, that it's
something that's inherited.
I think it's more out of habit.
But a lot of the habits we tend
to-- we take after our parents.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
That's why I brought it up.
>>OLSSON: Yeah.
>>REGINA: OK, so.
Also another thing that
affects it is poor posture.
>>OLSSON: Yeah.
That seems to go hand in hand.
So a dentist I work together
with from Australia,
he sees-- he works
mainly with children--
and if they are mouth breathers,
because we didn't want
to change slightly the
structure here in our throat,
so we tend to lean forward a
little bit, to make it easier
to breathe through our mouth.
While, if we have nasal
breathing, it's more easy to
have an upright posture.
So what he sees is that, when he
teaches the children to breathe
through their nose, close
their mouth more often,
they will start to automatically
improve their posture,
get a more upright position.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>OLSSON: And, of course,
if we are sitting there
in front of a computer
with a slumped posture,
it's very hard for
the diaphragm to work.
We almost always end
up breathing shallowly.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
And you see that-- I
played the piano was a kid.
So I got into the
habit of having kind
of ramrod straight posture.
And I notice at the
computer-- almost too much
so-- if I'm at the computer,
my back is really straight.
I can't do this.
It's not even possible.
I don't seem to be able to
make myself move hunched over.
>>OLSSON: Congratulations.
>>REGINA: For those piano
lessons early on in life.
>>OLSSON: Yeah, yeah.
>>REGINA: OK, now let's
talk about-- there
are several things I want
to get into in a little bit,
having to do with nasal sprays
and prescription nasal sprays
and all this.
We're going to get into asthma.
We have about 15 minutes left.
So we have some time
to get into these.
But first, let's talk about the
proper breathing techniques.
And I've written--
I've taken them out
of your book, the
top five points.
So we can get a good
tutorial before we
go into these nuanced things.
>>OLSSON: Yes.
So what I found
constitutes good breathing
habits is that it's in
and out through your nose,
it's down into your stomach
using your diaphragm,
it's slow, it's
rhythmically, and it's quiet.
Five very simple,
easy principles.
And most of us seem to breathe
in the opposite way-- not maybe
always, but most of the time.
So my idea is just
to help people
to realize that the
thousand breaths per hour,
if I take them in a really
stressed, poor fashion,
and then I start
to apply these five
principles of
conscious breathing,
I can start to reduce the amount
of breaths that are poorly
and start to increase the
amount of breaths that are good.
And, I think, if this represents
stress, and this harmony,
that this goes hand in
hand with our breath.
So when we reduce
poor breathings
we will also reduce stress.
And when we then, at the same
time, improve good breathing,
we will increase harmony.
>>REGINA: Well, you created
some little tools for people.
So this little tool
we have right here
is called the Relaxator, right?
>>OLSSON: That's true, yeah.
>>REGINA: Yeah, and
you just-- by the way,
does this little
thing go on the top
or bottom, this little
slit, this little opening?
>>OLSSON: It really
doesn't matter.
>>REGINA: Because I find,
if you do it long enough,
there's lot of
condensation, and it drips.
>>OLSSON: Yes, that's true.
So then you may
want to have it up.
>>REGINA: Have it right side up.
>>OLSSON: But usually,
that's just in the beginning.
That's usually something
that goes away.
It seems to be a way of seeing
that the body's healing.
Or, there are a few things.
We may get a bit tense,
because we're not
used to having
that in our mouth,
so we tense up a little bit,
and we produce more saliva.
Another thing is
that parasympathetic
is called "rest
and digest," so we
tend to go into more
parasympathetic with using
the Relaxator.
And parasympathetic, then,
we may produce more saliva.
Because we may think
it's time to eat.
>>REGINA: Oh, OK.
>>OLSSON: That's
the rest and digest.
>>REGINA: That might
be what's going on.
>>OLSSON: Yeah.
>>REGINA: But this
is kind of cool.
It has-- you kind of dial it.
Your level of resistance
can be dialed in.
And then you just put this
little thing in your mouth,
like you would a
snorkel or something,
and hangs around your neck.
And you breathe through--
in through your nose
and out through your mouth.
And what's the
point of breathing--
doing this cyclical
breathing out
through the mouth with this?
>>OLSSON: It's because, the
resistance it gives you,
the Relaxator, is that it
prolongs the exhalation.
It slows down your
breathing rate.
It makes it more rhythmically.
And it increases the
pressure in your lungs,
which improves the oxygenation
and improves the flow of air.
So, normally when we
are chest breathers,
we can look upon it like
water in a pond or in a creek.
The water in the
creek will probably
be more healthy to
drink than in the pond.
>>REGINA: Stagnant, yeah.
>>OLSSON: Stagnant, yes.
So that's what happens.
The stagnant air that
doesn't circulate,
we help that with the Relaxator
when we increase the pressure.
And we also increase
the pressure
in this area, where
we have the sinuses.
So there is also
more air circulation.
So, hopefully, we will
get less sinus congestion.
[SLOW BREATHING]
>>REGINA: It definitely
calms everything down.
>>OLSSON: It calms the
whole system down, yeah.
>>REGINA: So if a person has
poor breathing habits-- I mean,
I'm not trying to
sell products here--
but if they have poor
breathing habits,
and I'm trying to
think, how in the world
do I even begin to come
to grips with this?
Does something as
simple as this actually
start re-patterning them?
>>OLSSON: I would say so, yes.
Few of us are born with
poor breathing habits.
Most of these are acquired.
So we can retrain them.
So that's the idea with this.
And the most common
question I get, though,
is you tell that
we should inhale,
in and out through our nose.
And this is in through our
nose and out through the mouth.
So I just want to address that.
That's the negative
effect of using it,
that we are actually breathing
out through our mouth.
But I believe that
the positive effects--
>>REGINA: To re-pattern
the breathing.
Yes.
It feels-- I did it a few
days, like, for 15 minutes,
like you recommend.
Feels great.
>>OLSSON: Yeah?
>>REGINA: Yeah, it feels great.
I just felt nice and relaxed.
A couple times, I noticed,
I'd stop breathing for a bit.
But I had a hard time, because I
don't breathe through my mouth,
in the daytime, anyway.
I don't know about night.
But I had a hard
time-- I realized
I wasn't breathing,
because I'm not
used to breathing
through my mouth,
exhaling through the mouth.
So you have to consciously
participate with it,
originally, until you
get into that pattern.
>>OLSSON: Yes.
You are one of the few.
There's not that many.
>>REGINA: Oh.
>>OLSSON: I think.
That's not, at least,
the feedback I get.
>>REGINA: Oh, OK.
>>OLSSON: That's
usually not a problem.
>>REGINA: OK, so then that
means it works for most people.
>>OLSSON: It worked for most.
And yeah, stress, anxiety,
pain, seems to be great.
>>REGINA: And, I mean, really,
is there anything oxygen
doesn't affect, in terms of the
healing capacities in the body?
For, even with cancer,
for example, how much
can we expedite that healing
journey just by-- well, along
with whatever else you're
doing-- breathing properly?
>>OLSSON: I tend to
think, like, if we
have any kind of health
problems or low energy,
or poor sports
performance, we can
see that as a vicious cycle.
And in every one of those
cases, poor breathing habits
is one key ingredient.
So whatever we are experiencing,
even if it's cancer,
I think we can benefit from
improving our breathing.
Because it's all about
oxygenating our body,
when we think about it.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
The one nutrient we
can't live without.
>>OLSSON: No, exactly.
>>REGINA: The only nutrient we
can't live without is oxygen.
>>OLSSON: Yeah, and
again, poor breathing
will lead to-- we will
die if we stop breathing.
We need oxygen that desperately.
But again, it's about balance.
So when we have
too much oxygen, we
will induce oxidative stress.
Because oxygen is so highly
reactive-- it's just like if we
bite in an apple, and we
put it here for a minute,
it will turn brown.
And that's the oxidative, the
free radicals that are formed.
And the same going
on in our body.
So when we breathe for two,
or three, or four people,
we are bringing in all this
oxygen that we don't need.
So we increase the risk
for oxidative stress,
for inflammation, for
free radicals forming.
And then we talk
about that, of course,
we want to eat antioxidant-rich
food-- which is great, but even
greater is, of course, to
stop the free radicals to form
in the first place.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
In such a simple way.
OK.
Let's talk about sleep apnea.
Another one of the things you
have-- I have your little tools
here-- is this tape.
It's called "Sleep Tape," right?
>>OLSSON: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And that's
basically like what you did,
duct taped your mouth shut
while you're sleeping at night.
Let's talk about sleep apnea,
what's that doing to us,
what the risk is, and what
happens when any of us--
we don't actually know what
we're doing at night when we're
sleeping-- what happens when we
tape our mouths shut at night.
>>OLSSON: Yeah.
I was inspired by a
study where they blocked
the nose on the participants,
all healthy participants,
so they could only breathe
through their mouth.
And only in the first night,
all of them developed snoring.
One of them developed
sleep apnea.
And all of them said
they had poor sleep.
>>REGINA: I would think so.
It sounds horrible.
>>OLSSON: Yeah.
And then they should
take a step back.
>>REGINA: That cold,
polluted air, yeah.
>>OLSSON: And being a little
creative and think, OK.
So if a blocked nose
creates poor sleep,
what happens if you
block the mouth?
Could that create good sleep?
So that was basically the idea.
And since we sleep about
a third of our life,
it seems wise to have
our breathing work
for us instead of against us.
And open mouth at night,
at rest in general,
automatically means that
we are hyperventilating--
taking in too much oxygen,
exhaling too much carbon
dioxide, and then giving
rise to oxygen deficiency.
So we don't get the healing
and repair our body needs.
We may wake up tired.
We may wake up with a dry mouth.
And so forth-- we have
restless sleep, nightmares,
all kinds of stuff.
And, at some point, that
may lead to sleep apnea.
>>REGINA: And talk
about sleep apnea--
what it is, what it does,
what the danger of that
is to the body, and why do more
men seem to have it than women,
>>OLSSON: For one thing,
it's connected to weight.
Overweight on the outside
means overweight on the inside.
So it's harder for
the air to pass.
And that's, again, connected
to breathing in some way.
I've never come
across a diet program
where they also include
improve your breathing habits.
>>REGINA: At the end, I
want to talk about that.
>>OLSSON: OK, I
can just mention--
>>REGINA: Yeah, go ahead, do
it now-- digestion, metabolism,
and weight loss, yeah.
>>OLSSON: Yeah.
Because we cannot burn fat
in the absence of oxygen.
So when we deprive
our body of oxygen,
we have to go more to
our sugar storage system.
And we close-- we
shut the door slightly
to our fat storage system.
So that may lead to us
putting on weight, which,
at some point, may be
one of the ingredients
why we have sleep apnea--
which is basically that we
hold our breath when we sleep.
And in the medical setting,
they consider it as a disease
when you're asleep.
I would like to look at it
from a broader perspective.
And it's very unlikely that
you have really poor sleep--
which you have, when
you have sleep apnea.
Think about it-- holding
your breath and then,
after a while-- some hold their
breath for 15, 30, 50 seconds--
>>REGINA: Really, that long?
>>OLSSON: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Oh.
>>OLSSON: And after that, you
start to [RAPID BREATHING]
hyperventilate.
It's like out driving the car--
>>REGINA: Really bad, yeah.
>>OLSSON: --one foot on
the brake, one on the gas.
Horrible.
>>REGINA: No good for your body.
>>OLSSON: No, so that's
really stressful for the body.
>>REGINA: That could cause
cardiac issues, I would think.
>>OLSSON: Yeah, because every
time you hold your breath,
you're starting to get the
adrenaline out, the fight
or flight, and the whole system
starts to get on red alert.
And what I think is
one missing factor
is to look at the
whole 24 hours.
Because it's highly
unlikely that you
have these poor breathing
habits while you're
asleep, and then have the
most wonderful breathing
habits during the day.
You most likely train your
body to hold your breath
during daytime.
I call it concentration apnea.
Or, you could call it text
message apnea, or computer
apnea, where we hold our
breath during our day.
With all these tons of
stimulate we are bombarded with,
it gives rise to
emotions and thoughts,
and they tend to alter
our breathing pattern,
including holding our breath.
So I think it's-- one
way, it's habitual,
another way is weight,
and a third way is
the under-development of the
maxilla in the upper airways
here.
>>REGINA: So if a
person has sleep apnea,
by simply taking their mouth
shut, can they start breathing?
Or have the passageways narrowed
so much that they can't even
do it?
I mean, what's the answer?
>>OLSSON: Well, it's--
>>REGINA: Or just basic snoring,
mouth breathing at night.
>>OLSSON: Yeah, if you snore,
you do it through the mouth,
usually.
So by just taping
your mouth, you
may get rid of your snoring.
>>REGINA: Really?
Oh, boy, there a lot of
women around the planet,
and men, that would
be happy to hear it
could be such a simple fix.
>>OLSSON: Tell me-- yeah.
They say that all the
time in my courses.
Oh, now I will go home
and tape up my husband.
>>REGINA: Does it work?
>>OLSSON: Yeah, yeah.
It works.
For some, it completely
disappears, the snoring.
And for some, they
continue to [SNORE]
snore a little bit
through the nose,
because that's
possible, as well.
But usually it goes
down quite a bit.
And then, hopefully, they
would take the next steps
and start to improve
their breathing habits
and get rid of it altogether.
>>REGINA: That is such a
simple fix for a problem that
has caused divorces.
>>OLSSON: Yes.
>>REGINA: OK.
I wanted to ask you
about a couple things
we mentioned earlier, which
was the notion of nasal sprays.
So we end up with
these blocked passages.
It could be whatever.
I mean, maybe they've
been narrowed habitually,
maybe we have an allergy,
maybe we have a cold.
What happens if we're always
using these nasal sprays?
>>OLSSON: Well,
it's like, you know,
if you're always taking
the elevator, or the car,
or whatever, your
body gets lazy.
And the same thing, if
we use these things,
our body gets lazy.
And our ability to
solve the problems
ourself, they decrease.
So I would advocate to try
and get rid of nasal spray,
and ask the question, what is
the reason behind my blocked
nose.
What is the reason behind
whatever health problem I have.
It's usually not--
I mean, a headache
is not the lack of painkillers,
it's something else.
And one thing, which we talked
about earlier, the imbalance
that's created between
oxygen and carbon dioxide--
so when we over-breathe, we tend
then to exhale too much carbon
dioxide, we lower
it in our body,
and we can see the blocked nose
or the tight airways-- which
you can get asthma
undiagnosed-- it's
a defense mechanism from the
body trying to prevent outflow
of carbon dioxide.
Because it only leaves
our body on out breath.
So what many people
find is that,
when they start to improve their
breathing, and breathe slower,
and then maintaining more
carbon dioxide in their body,
they feel that
[SNIFF, SNIFF] oh,
my nose starts to get freer.
And we have these erectile
tissue here in the nose,
so they start to become smaller.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
OK, now what about
using the neti pot,
a classic old-fashioned way
of keeping the toxins out.
How does that factor in?
>>OLSSON: I think that's
great to cleanse the nose.
But at some point, the nose
is a self-cleansing device,
extremely efficient.
Because all the particles that
end up here on inhalation,
they will, when we exhale,
so they will be blown out.
So, at some point,
I think you will not
need the neti pot when you
improve your breathing habits.
But it could be really great
when in the beginning if,
you have a blocked nose.
>>REGINA: OK.
And then, finally,
what about asthma?
>>OLSSON: So asthma.
Asthma is a disease
of the airways
where, it seems like, we again
have this problem with carbon
dioxide.
And many that have asthma
fears that they cannot inhale.
They can only breathe
very shallowly.
And usually the key is in the
exhale-- to try and prolong
the exhalation.
Not too [EXHALE]
empty the lungs fully,
but to empty them slightly
a little bit more.
And then you will automatically
be able to breathe deeper.
So you will be able to
calm down and change
this [RAPID BREATHING].
Because that is how
the breathing usually
looks when you are about
to get an asthma attack.
[RAPID BREATH] It's
very fast, it's shallow,
in and out through the mouth.
So by just doing the reverse--
mouth breathing, slow and deep,
you will be able to calm down.
And the key is usually just
to prolong your exhalation.
>>REGINA: OK.
When someone's having
an asthma attack,
if they don't have an
inhaler, or if they
have to deal with it,
just use your breath.
>>OLSSON: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Right?
Use the breath and
slow exhalations.
And again, if you're
playing with something
like the Relaxator or
conscious breathing,
can that help overcome
asthmatic conditions?
>>OLSSON: I'm not telling anyone
to throw away their medication
and just breathing.
>>REGINA: Right, but can
it improve the situation?
>>OLSSON: Oh, yeah.
It can improve,
and it can-- they
can get rid of it, as well.
Just imagine having
this, knowing
that you have this tool
with you all the time.
It must be very stressful to
have asthma and [GASPING] I
cannot breathe.
Where is my meditation?
And then, come to realization,
I have my breath with me.
>>REGINA: That's-- I
mean, again, it sounds--
it's the one little miracle
we're always carrying
in our pocket and
totally unconscious of.
>>OLSSON: Yes, true.
>>REGINA: Any final thoughts?
We just have a minute or so.
>>OLSSON: Well, the
thing is, of course--
the knowledge is one thing.
And the principles
are really easy.
And we can see-- we
can see up in it,
like, a minute to
learn but it could
take a lifetime to master.
I still consider myself
a rookie, for example.
I think there is so much
more to do in improving
our breath in our daily life.
>>REGINA: Maybe
one good thing is
to start the day with just
simple, taking five minutes,
and just consciously breathe.
>>OLSSON: Yeah.
>>REGINA: To make ourselves
aware of our breath
throughout the day.
>>OLSSON: That's a great way.
Or closing the day before--
>>REGINA: Or closing the day--
>>OLSSON: --before going to bed.
>>REGINA: --before we tape
our mouths shut for the night.
Thank you, so much.
I just, again-- I find this
primal information-- really
interesting and necessary.
Yeah, and thanks for all
the little devices, too.
It was great.
>>OLSSON: Yeah?
>>REGINA: Thanks, Anders.
>>OLSSON: Thank you.
>>REGINA: Again, the
name of Anders's book
is called "The Power
of Your Breath."
And you can find this and his
other tools on his website
at TheRelaxator.com or
ConsciousBreathing.com.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Gaiam TV.